2022
January 17th
Exactly one year ago today I came home, to Russia.
I didn’t manage to take a single step on the soil of my country as a free man: I
was arrested even before border control.

The hero of one of my favorite books,“Resurrection,” by Leo Tolstoy, says,“Yes,
the only suitable place for an honest man in Russia at the present time is
prison.”

It sounds fine, but it was wrong then, and it’s even more wrong now.
There are a lot of honest people in Russia—tens of millions. There are far more
than is commonly believed.

The authorities, however, who were repugnant then and are even more so now,
are afraid not of honest people but of those who are not afraid of them. Or let
me be more precise: those who may be afraid but overcome their fear.

There are a lot of them, too. We meet them all the time, in all sorts of places,
from rallies to the media, people who remain independent. Indeed, even here,
on Instagram. I recently read that the Ministry of the Interior was firing staff
who had “liked” my posts. So in Russia, in 2022, even a “like” can take courage.

In every period, the essence of politics has been that a tin-pot tsar who wants to
arrogate to himself the right to personal, unaccountable power needs to
intimidate the honest people who are not afraid of him. And they, in turn, need
to convince everyone around them that they should not be afraid, that there are,
by an order of magnitude, more honest people than the mean little tsar’s
security guards. Why live your whole life in fear, even being robbed in the
process, if everything can be arranged differently and more justly?

The pendulum swings endlessly. Or the tug-of-war. Today you are brave.
Tomorrow they seem to have scared you a bit. And the day after tomorrow they
have scared you so much that you despair and become brave again.

I have no idea when my journey into space will end, if ever, but on Friday I was
informed that another criminal case is being brought against me and going to
court. And there is yet another coming up, in which I am supposedly an
extremist and a terrorist. So I’m one of those cosmonauts who don’t count the
days until the end of their term. What is there to count? People have been kept
in prison for as long as twenty-seven years.

But I find myself in this company of cosmonauts precisely because I tried my
utmost to tug my end of the rope. I pulled over to this side those among the
honest people who would not be or could no longer bear to be afraid.
That is what I did. I don’t for a second regret it. And I will continue to do it.
Having spent my first year in prison, I want to tell everyone exactly the same
thing I shouted to those who gathered outside the court when the guards were
taking me off to the police truck: Don’t be afraid of anything. This is our
country and it’s the only one we have.

The only thing we should fear is that we will surrender our homeland to be
plundered by a gang of liars, thieves, and hypocrites. That we will surrender
without a fight, voluntarily, our own future and the future of our children.
Huge thanks to all of you for your support. I can feel it.

I’d just like to add: This year has gone by incredibly quickly. It seems only
yesterday I was boarding the plane to Moscow, and now I’ve already completed
a year in prison. It’s true what they say in science books: time on earth and in
space passes at different speeds.

I love you all. Hugs to everyone.

March 22nd
Nine years of strict regime. Today, on March 22nd, a new sentence was
announced. Before that, I ran a sweepstakes with my lawyers. The losers
would have to buy whoever won a drink. Olga reckoned eleven to fifteen years.
Vadim surprised everyone with his prediction of precisely twelve years and six
months. I guessed seven to eight years and was the winner.
I decided to record my feelings right away, because all year I had been training
for situations like today, developing what I call my “prison Zen.”
Whatever way you look at it, nine years, especially in “strict” conditions, is an
extremely long sentence. In Russia, the average punishment for murder is seven
years.

A prisoner sentenced to an extra term of nine years is going to be upset, to say
the least. When I got back to the prison, everyone—who of course already
knew about the sentence—furtively gave me a particular kind of look. How was
I taking it? What was the expression on my face? It is, after all, intriguing to see
someone’s reaction when they have just been told they will be serving the
longest sentence of anyone in the entire prison complex. And that they are
going to be sent somewhere especially grim and usually reserved for murderers.
Nobody is going to come over and ask how I feel, but everyone is curious to see
how this plays out. It’s an occasion when a person might hang themselves or
slash their wrists.

But I am completely fine. Even “my”jailer said in the course of a really
annoying full strip search,“You don’t look to me to be all that upset.”I am really
O.K.I am writing this not because I am willing myself to keep up a pretense of
being carefree and blasé but because my prison Zen has kicked in.
I knew from the outset that I would be imprisoned for life—either for the rest
of my life or until the end of the life of this regime.
Regimes like this one are resilient, and the most foolish thing I could do is pay
attention to people who say,“Lyosha, sure, the regime is going to last at least
another year, but the year after that, two at most, it will fall apart and you will
be a free man.” And everything along those lines. People write that to me
frequently.

The U.S.S.R. lasted seventy years. The repressive regimes in North Korea and
Cuba survive to this day. China, with a whole bunch of political prisoners, has
lasted so long that those prisoners grow old and die in prison. The Chinese
regime does not relent. It releases no one, despite all the international pressure.
The truth of the matter is that we underestimate just how resilient autocracies
are in the modern world. With very, very rare exceptions, they are protected
from external invasion by the U.N., by international law, by the rights of
sovereignty. Russia, which right now is waging a classic war of aggression
against Ukraine (which has increased tenfold the predictions of the regime’s
imminent collapse), is additionally protected by its membership in the U.N.
Security Council and its nuclear weapons.

Economic collapse and impoverishment await us most likely. But it is far from
obvious that the regime will come crashing down in such a way that its falling
debris breaks open the doors of its prisons.

My approach to the situation is certainly not one of contemplative passivity. I
am trying to do everything I can from here to put an end to authoritarianism
(or, more modestly, to contribute to ending it). Every single day, I ponder how
to act more effectively, what constructive advice to give my colleagues who are
still at liberty, where the regime’s greatest vulnerabilities lie. As I said, giving in
to wishful thinking (about when the regime will collapse and I will be released)
would be the worst thing I could do. What if I’m not free in a year? Or three
years? Would I lapse into depression? Blame everyone else for not trying hard
enough to get me released? Curse world leaders and public opinion for having
forgotten me?

Relying on being released anytime soon, waiting for it to happen, is only a way
of tormenting myself.

I decided from the beginning that if I was going to be released as a result of
pressure or a political scenario it would happen within six months of my arrest,
“while the iron was hot.” And, if it didn’t, I was up the creek for the foreseeable
future. I needed to adjust my thinking so that when they did extend my
sentence I would feel even more sure I was doing the right thing when I
boarded that plane back to Moscow.

Here are the techniques I worked out. Perhaps others may find them helpful in
the future (but let’s hope they are not needed).

The first is frequently to be found in self-help books: Imagine the worst thing
that can happen, and accept it. This works, even if it’s a masochistic exercise. I can imagine that it’s not suitable for people suffering from clinical depression.
They might do it so successfully that they end up hanging themselves.

It’s a fairly easy exercise, because it involves a skill everyone developed in
childhood. You may remember crying your eyes out in your bed and exultantly
imagining you are going to die right then and there just to spite everyone.
Imagine the look on the faces of your parents! How they will cry when it finally
dawns on them who they have lost! Choked with tears, they’ll beg you, as you
lie quiet and still in your little coffin, to get up and come and watch TV, not just
until ten o’clock but until eleven, if only you would be alive. But it is too late,
you are dead, which means you are unrelenting and deaf to their pleas.

Well, mine is much the same idea.

Get into your prison bunk and wait to hear “Lights out.”The lights are
switched off. You invite yourself to imagine, as realistically as possible, the worst
thing that could happen. And then, as I said, accept it (skipping the stages of
denial, anger, and bargaining).

I will spend the rest of my life in prison and die here. There will not be anybody
to say goodbye to. Or, while I am still in prison, people I know outside will die
and I won’t be able to say goodbye to them. I will miss graduations from school
and college. Tasselled mortarboards will be tossed in the air in my absence. All
anniversaries will be celebrated without me. I’ll never see my grandchildren. I
won’t be the subject of any family stories. I’ll be missing from all the photos.
You need to think about this seriously, and your cruel imagination will whisk
you through your fears so swiftly that you will arrive at your “eyes filled with
tears” destination in next to no time. The important thing is not to torment
yourself with anger, hatred, fantasies of revenge, but to move instantly to
acceptance. That can be hard.

I remember having to stop one of my first sessions at the idea that I will die
here, forgotten by everybody, and be buried in an unmarked grave. My family
will be informed that “in accordance with the law the burial site cannot be
disclosed.”I had difficulty resisting an urge to start furiously smashing
everything around me, overturning bunks and bedside tables and yelling, You
bastards! You have no right to bury me in an unmarked grave. It’s against the
law! It isn’t fair! I actually wanted to shout that out.

Instead of yelling, you need to think about the situation calmly. So what if that
comes to pass? Worse things happen.
I’m forty-five. I have a family and children. I’ve had a life to live, worked on
some interesting things, done some things that were useful. But there’s a war on
right now. Suppose a nineteen-year-old is riding in an armored vehicle, he gets
a piece of shrapnel in his head, and that’s it. He has had no family, no children,
no life. Right now, dead civilians are lying in the streets in Mariupol, their
bodies gnawed at by dogs, and many of them will be lucky if they end up in
even a mass grave—through no fault of their own. I made my choices, but these
people were just living their lives. They had jobs. They were family
breadwinners. Then, one fine evening, a vengeful runt on television, the
President of a neighboring country, announces that you are all “Nazis” and have
to die because Ukraine was invented by Lenin. The next day, a shell comes
flying in your window and you no longer have a wife, a husband, or children—
and maybe you yourself are also no longer alive.

And how many guiltless prisoners there are here! While you are sitting with
your bagful of letters, other prisoners have never had a letter or package from
anyone. Some of them will get sick and die in the prison hospital. Alone.
The Soviet dissidents? Anatoly Marchenko died from a hunger strike in 1986,
and a couple of years later the satanic Soviet Union fell to pieces. So even the
worst possible scenario is not actually all that bad. I resigned myself and accept
it.
Yulia has been such a help in this. I didn’t want her to be tormented by all that
“perhaps they’ll let him out after a month”stuff. Most important, I wanted her
to know I was not suffering here. On her first extended visit, we walked down a
corridor and spoke at a spot as far removed as possible from the cameras wired
for sound that are tucked in all over the place. I whispered in her ear,“Listen, I
don’t want to sound dramatic, but I think there’s a high probability I’ll never get
out of here. Even if everything starts falling apart, they will bump me off at the
first sign the regime is collapsing. They will poison me.”

“I know,”she said with a nod, in a voice that was calm and firm.“I was thinking
that myself.”

At that moment I wanted to seize her in my arms and hug her joyfully, as hard
as I could. That was so great! No tears! It was one of those moments when you
realize you found the right person. Or perhaps she found you.“Let’s just decide for ourselves that this is most likely what’s going to happen.
Let’s accept it as the base scenario and arrange our lives on that basis. If things
turn out better, that will be marvellous, but we won’t count on it or have ill founded hopes.”

“Yep. Let’s do it.”

As usual, her voice sounded as if it belonged to a character in a cartoon, but she
was dead serious. She looked up at me and batted her eyes with those big
eyelashes, at which point I swept her up in my arms, hugging her in delight.
Where else could I ever have found someone who could discuss the most
difficult matters with me without a lot of drama and hand-wringing? She
entirely got it and, like me, would hope for the best, but expect and prepare for
the worst.

Yulia laughed and broke free. I kissed her on the nose and felt much better.
There is, of course, a hint of trickery and self-deception in all this. You have
accepted the worst-case scenario, but there is an inner voice you can’t stifle:
Come off it, the worst is never going to happen. Even as you tell yourself your
direst fate is unavoidable, you’re hoping against hope that someone will change
your mind for you.

The process going on in your head is by no means straightforward, but if you
find yourself in a bad situation, you should try this. It works, as long as you
think everything through seriously.

The second technique is so old you may roll your eyes heavenward when you
hear it. It is religion. It is doable only for believers but does not demand zealous,
fervent prayer by the prison barracks window three times a day (a very common
phenomenon in prisons).

I have always thought, and said openly, that being a believer makes it easier to
live your life and, to an even greater extent, engage in opposition politics. Faith
makes life simpler.

The initial position for this exercise is the same as for the previous one. You lie
in your bunk looking up at the one above and ask yourself whether you are a
Christian in your heart of hearts. It is not essential for you to believe some old
guys in the desert once lived to be eight hundred years old, or that the sea was
literally parted in front of someone. But are you a disciple of the religion whose
founder sacrificed himself for others, paying the price for their sins? Do you
believe in the immortality of the soul and the rest of that cool stuff? If you can
honestly answer yes, what is there left for you to worry about? Why, under your
breath, would you mumble a hundred times something you read from a hefty
tome you keep in your bedside table? Don’t worry about the morrow, because
the morrow is perfectly capable of taking care of itself.

My job is to seek the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and leave it to
good old Jesus and the rest of his family to deal with everything else. They
won’t let me down and will sort out all my headaches. As they say in prison
here: they will take my punches for me.

March 26th
The ghastliest days in prison are the birthdays of close family, especially
children.

I What sort of pathetic greeting is it to send a letter to your son on his
fourteenth birthday? What kind of memory will that be of being close to his
father?

“For my birthday my dad took me on a hike.”

“Well, on my birthday, my dad taught me how to drive a car.”

“For my birthday my dad sent me a letter from prison on a piece of notepaper.
He promised that when he gets out he’ll teach me how to boil water in a plastic
bag.”

Let’s face it, you don’t get to choose your parents. Some kids get stuck with
jailbirds.

But it is on my children’s birthdays that I am particularly aware of why I’m in
jail. We need to build the Beautiful Russia of the Future for them to live in.
Zakhar, happy birthday!

I really miss you and love you very much.

April 3rd
It’s a real Russian spring day. That is, the snowdrifts are up to my waist, and
it’s been snowing all weekend. Snow is something prisoners hate, because
what do they do when it snows and after it snows? That’s right, they clear the
snow away. Arguing that it is, after all, April, and in at most ten days it will all
just melt anyway, not only doesn’t work but draws heartfelt indignation from
the prison administration. If anything is lying anywhere in violation of the
regulations and the normal routine of doing things, it must be shovelled up,
scraped off, and removed. That said, clearing snow actually is one of the most
meaningful activities in prison life, because most of the others are an inane
response to the need to generate work at all costs. The prisoners have a saying:
“It doesn’t matter where what gets chucked, as long as the con feels completely
fucked.”

This describes my feeling every weekend, because, although you can find at
least an inkling of sense in shovelling snow in April, the work is genuinely
exhausting. Because I am classified as a nontrusted prisoner, they don’t allow me
to shovel the snow like everyone else and to break the ice on the “main line,”
the camp’s principal street, along which the commandant walks. In my local
area and with my own squad, though, I have to shovel.

We all have that classic labor-camp look that belongs in a movie about the
Gulag.The heavy jackets, fur hats, and mittens, the enormous wooden shovels,
each of which is so heavy you would think it was made of cast iron, especially
after it gets saturated with water, which freezes. They are the selfsame shovels
used by the soldiers who cleared the streets of my military home town when I
was a child. You might have thought that in the thirty years that have passed
since then shovel technology would have progressed toward production of
lighter shovels, but in Russia, as with so many other things, we didn’t hack it.
We were brought a couple of lightweight shovels that immediately broke. The
response was the usual “Oh, well, what the hell, let them use the wooden
shovels. We’ve used them for shovelling snow all our lives. They are reliable.” As
if to say, Our grandfathers invented these shovels and far be it from us to doubt
their wisdom by trying to improve something that is already ideal.

So there I was, scowling, wearing a heavy winter jacket, and wielding a wooden
shovel with snow frozen to it. The only thing that amused me, and at least
partly enabled me to accept this reality, is that on these occasions I feel like the
hero of my all-time favorite joke. It is a Soviet joke, but has a certain relevance
today.

A boy goes out for a stroll in the courtyard of his apartment block. Boys playing
soccer there invite him to join in. The boy is a bit of a stay-at-home, but he’s
interested and runs over to play with them. He eventually manages to kick the
ball, very hard, but unfortunately it crashes through the window of the basement room where the janitor lives. Unsurprisingly, the janitor emerges. He is unshaven, wearing a fur hat and quilted jacket, and clearly the worse for a hangover. Infuriated, the janitor stares at the boy before rushing at him.

The boy runs away as fast as he can and thinks, What do I need this for? After
all, I’m a quiet, stay-at-home sort of boy. I like reading. Why play soccer with
the other boys? Why am I running away right now from this scary janitor when
I could be lying at home on the couch reading a book by my favorite American
writer, Hemingway?

Meanwhile, Hemingway is reclining on a chaise longue in Cuba, with a glass of
rum in his hand, and thinking, God, I’m so tired of this rum and Cuba. All this
dancing, and shouting, and the sea. Damn it, I’m a clever guy. Why am I here
instead of being in Paris discussing existentialism with my colleague Jean-Paul
Sartre over a glass of Calvados?

Meanwhile, Jean-Paul Sartre, sipping Calvados, is looking at the scene in front
of him and thinking, How I hate Paris. I can’t stand the sight of these
boulevards. I’m sick and tired of all these rapturous students and their
revolutions. Why do I have to be here, when I long to be in Moscow, engaging
in fascinating dialogue with my friend Andrei Platonov, the great Russian
writer?

Meanwhile, in Moscow, Platonov is running across a snow-covered courtyard
and thinking, If I catch that little bastard, I’ll fucking kill him.

Although, of course,I am no Andrei Platonov, I have the quilted jacket and the
fur hat, and I, too, am writing a book. Next, I’ll finish the chapter about how I
met Yulia.

July 1st
I live like Putin and Medvedev.

At least I think so when I look at the fence around my barracks. Everyone has
the usual fence, and inside there are rods to dry the laundry on. But I have a
six-metre-high fence, the kind I have only seen in our investigations of Putin’s
and Medvedev’s palaces.

Putin both lives and works in such a place—in Novo-Ogaryovo or Sochi. And I
live in a similar place. Putin lets ministers sit in the waiting room for six hours,
and my lawyers have to wait five or six hours to see me. I have a loudspeaker in
my barracks that plays songs like “Glory to the F.S.B.,” and I think Putin has
one, too.

That’s where the similarities end, though.

Putin, as you know, sleeps until 10 a.m., then swims in the pool and eats
cottage cheese with honey.

But, for me, 10 a.m. is lunchtime, because work starts at 6:40 a.m.

6:00—Wake up. Ten minutes to make my bed, wash, shave, and so on.

6:10—Exercise.

6:20—Escorted to breakfast.

6:40—Searched and escorted to work.

At work, you sit for seven hours at the sewing machine on a stool below knee
height.

10:20—Fifteen-minute lunch break.

After work, you continue to sit for a few hours on a wooden bench under a
portrait of Putin. This is called “disciplinary activity.”

On Saturday, you work for five hours and sit on the bench under the portrait
again.

Sunday, in theory, is a day off. But in the Putin administration, or wherever my
unique routine was set up, they are experts at relaxation. On Sunday, we sit in a
room on a wooden bench for ten hours.

I don’t know who can be “disciplined” by such activities, except a cripple with a
bad back. But maybe that’s their goal. But you know me, I’m an optimist and
look for the bright side even in my dark existence. I have as much fun as I can.
While sewing, I’ve memorized Hamlet’s soliloquy in English.

However, the inmates on my shift say that when I close my eyes and mutter
something in Shakespearean English, like “in thy orisons be all my sins
remembered,”it looks as if I were summoning a demon.

But I have no such thoughts: summoning a demon would be a violation of the
prison regulations.

2023
January 12th
In my two years behind bars, my only truly original story is the one about the
psycho. Everything else has been told and described numerous times. If you
open any book by a Soviet dissident, there will be endless stories of punishment
cells, hunger strikes, violence, provocations, lack of medical care. Nothing new.
But my story about the psycho is fresh; at least,I’ve never seen or heard
anything like it

So, let me give you an idea about the shizo, the place where I sit all the time. It
is a narrow corridor with cells on either side. The metal doors offer little to no
soundproofing, plus there are ventilation holes above the doors, so two people
sitting in opposite cells can have a conversation without even raising their
voices. This is the main reason there has never been anyone in the cell opposite
mine, or in my entire eight-cell section. I am the only one there, and I have
never seen any other punished convicts the whole time.

And then, about a month ago, they put a psycho in the cell across from mine.
At first, I thought he was faking it. He was very active. If you tell a kid to act
like a madman, that’s what he’ll come up with. Screaming, growling, hitting,
barking, arguing with himself in three different voices. But, in the case of my psycho, seventy per cent of the words are obscene. There are a lot of videos
online of people who think that they’ve been possessed by demons. This is very
similar—the growling wail (my favorite of his three personas) comes on
periodically and doesn’t cease for hours. That’s why I stopped thinking he was a
faker; no normal person can yell for fourteen hours every day and three hours at
night for a month. And, when I say “yell,”I mean the kind of yelling that makes
your neck veins swell up.

For the past month, I’ve been going nuts and starting every checkup by
demanding this lunatic be transferred elsewhere. It’s impossible to sleep at
night or read during the day. They don’t transfer him, and they go out of their
way to emphasize that he is a convict just like me.

And then I find out a wonderful detail: this nutcase was incarcerated (he got
twenty-four years for killing someone) in another place, and a month ago they
moved him here, and now they keep him in a punishment cell so that he can, so
to speak, keep me entertained.

I have to admit that this plan is working: I never get bored, nor do I ever get a
good night’s sleep. Being ill here is something else: during the day you suffer in
a cell with a fever and long for it to be night, when they lower your bunk bed
and give you a mattress, but at night you listen to the cheerful barking of your
neighbor. As you know, sleep deprivation is one of the most effective tortures,
but formally I can’t complain: he’s an inmate like me, he was also put in a
punishment cell, and it’s up to the administration to decide who gets put into
which cell.

But as usual in such situations I am amazed at something else.

This was all planned. Someone thought of this and implemented it at the
regional or federal level. You can’t transfer a convict for no reason at all; there’s a
rule about serving your whole term in one camp. So there was an order from
above: Put pressure on him. And the generals and colonels at lower levels held a
meeting: So, how shall we put pressure on him? And someone wanting to distinguish himself said, We have a madman in such-and-such prison; he screams day and night. Let’s take him to Navalny.

What a great idea, fellow-officers. Comrade Colonel, proceed and report on it.

I wouldn’t be surprised if it turns out that they took a raving madman from a
prison hospital and declared him sane, just to keep him in a cell across from
mine.

The moral of this story is simple: The Russian prison system, the Federal
Penitentiary Service, is run by a collection of perverts. Everything in their
system has a sick twist: the infamous mop rapes, sticking things up people’s
anuses, and so on. It wouldn’t occur to a bad-but-sane person to do such a
thing. Everything you read about the horrors and fascist crimes of our prison
system is true. There’s just one correction needed: the reality is even worse

January 17th
It has been exactly two years since I returned to Russia. I have spent these
two years in prison. When you write a post like this, you have to ask yourself:
How many more such anniversary posts will you have to write?

Life and the events around us prompt the answer: However many it may take.
Our miserable, exhausted motherland needs to be saved. It has been pillaged,
wounded, dragged into an aggressive war, and turned into a prison run by the
most unscrupulous and deceitful scoundrels. Any opposition to this gang—even
if only symbolic in my current limited capacity—is important.

I said it two years ago, and I will say it again: Russia is my country. I was born
and raised here, my parents are here, and I made a family here; I found someone
I loved and had kids with her. I am a full-fledged citizen, and I have the right to
unite with like-minded people and be politically active. There are plenty of us,
certainly more than corrupt judges, lying propagandists, and Kremlin crooks.

I’m not going to surrender my country to them, and I believe that the darkness
will eventually yield. But as long as it persists I will do all I can, try to do what
is right, and urge everyone not to abandon hope.

Russia will be happy!

June 4th
It’s my birthday today. When I woke up, I joked to myself that I can now add
the shizo to the list of places where I’ve celebrated it over the years. And
then, like many other people who reach a certain age (I turned forty-seven
today, wow),I thought about my accomplishments over the past year and my
plans for the next.

I haven’t accomplished much, and this was best summed up the other day by
the psychologist at our penal colony. The procedure requires that before you are
sent to the shizo you must be examined by a medical officer (to check whether
you will be able to withstand it) and a psychologist (to make sure you don’t
hang yourself).Well, after our meeting, the psychologist said,“This is the
sixteenth time we’ve put you in the shizo, but you keep cracking jokes, and
your mood is much better than that of the commission members.”That’s true,
but on the morning of your birthday you have to be honest with yourself, so I
ask myself the question, Am I really in a good mood, or do I force myself to feel
that way?

My answer is, I really am. Let’s face it, of course I wish I didn’t have to wake up
in this hellhole and could, instead, have breakfast with my family, receive kisses
on the cheek from my children, unwrap presents, and say,“Wow, this is exactly
what I dreamed of!”But life works in such a way that social progress and a
better future can be achieved only if a certain number of people are willing to
pay the price for their right to have their own beliefs. The more of them there
are, the less everyone has to pay. And the day will come when speaking the
truth and advocating for justice will be commonplace and not dangerous in
Russia.

But, until that day comes, I see my situation not as a heavy burden or a yoke but
as a job that needs to be done. Every job has its unpleasant aspects, right? So
I’m going through the unpleasant part of my favorite job right now.
My plan for the previous year was not to become brutalized and bitter and lose
my laid-back demeanor; that would mean the beginning of my defeat. And all
my success in this was possible only because of your support.

As always, on my birthday, I want to thank all the people I’ve met in my life.
The good ones for having helped and still helping me. The bad ones for the fact
that my experience with them has taught me something. Thanks to my family
for always being there for me!

But the biggest thank-you and biggest salute I want to give today goes to all
political prisoners in Russia, Belarus, and other countries. Most of them have it
much harder than me. I think about them all the time. Their resilience inspires
me every day.

June 19th
Some people collect stamps. Some collect coins. And I have a growing
collection of amazing court trials. I was tried in the Khimki police station,
where I was sitting under the portrait of Genrikh Yagoda. I was tried in a
standard regime penal colony, and they called it an “open trial.”
And now they’re trying me in a closed trial in a maximum-security penal
colony.

In a sense, this is the new sincerity. They now say openly, We are afraid of you.
We are afraid of what you will say. We are afraid of the truth.

This is an important confession. And it makes practical sense for all of us. We
must do what they fear—tell the truth, spread the truth. This is the most
powerful weapon against this regime of liars, thieves, and hypocrites. Everyone
has this weapon. So make use of it.

August 4th
Nineteen years in a maximum-security penal colony. The number of years
does not matter. I understand perfectly well that, like many political
prisoners, I am serving a life sentence. Where “life” is defined by either the
length of my life or the length of the life of this regime.

The sentencing figure is not for me. It is for you. You, not I, are being
frightened and deprived of the will to resist. You are being forced to surrender
your country without a fight to the gang of traitors, thieves, and scoundrels who
have seized power. Putin must not achieve his goal. Do not lose the will to
resist.

November 13th
When you are looking for a wife, be sure to check the potential spouse to
see whether she has been registered as a juvenile delinquent. I didn’t do
that and here I am.

On a daily basis, the administration informs me that they are unable to deliver
another letter from Navalnaya Y. B. The correspondence was seized by the
censor because it contained evidence of preparation for a crime. It applies to all
recent correspondence.

I wrote to her, saying,“Yulia, stop preparing crimes! Instead, cook some borscht
for the kids.”

However, she can’t stop. She carries on inventing new crimes and keeps writing
to me about them in her letters.
Once upon a time, about a hundred years ago, she told me that in her school
days, she, along with her friends, conspired to steal a briefcase from a classmate
and study the trajectory of an object flying out of a second-floor window. Just to clarify, the flying object was the briefcase, not the classmate. Although, actually,
I’m not so sure now.

Even back then, her criminal inclinations were evident. Not a spouse, but more like some kind of outlaw.

December 1st
I have no idea which word to use to describe my latest news. Is it sad, funny,
or absurd?

I am brought letters and the conversation begins:

“Any letters from my wife?”

“Censored.”

“Any papers from my lawyer?”

“Censored.”

“So what do you have?”

“There’s one from the investigator.”

I open the letter from the State Investigative Committee: “We inform you that
a criminal case has been opened against you for a crime under Part 2 of Article
214 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. Two episodes.”
They initiate a new criminal case against me every three months. Rarely has an
inmate in solitary confinement for more than a year had such a vibrant social
and political life.

I have no idea what Article 214 is, and there’s nowhere to look. You’ll know
about it before I do.

Nevertheless, this seems to be a case of positive feedback, as the scientists might
say. If this Kremlin gang of corrupters, traitors, and occupiers does not like what
I (we) are doing, we must be on the right path.

December 26th
I am your new Santa Claus.

Well, I now have a sheepskin coat and an ushanka fur hat, and soon I will get
felt boots.I have grown a beard during the twenty days of my travels under
escort. Unfortunately, there are no reindeer, but there are huge, fluffy, and very
beautiful German shepherds.

And the most important thing: I now live above the Arctic Circle in the village
of Kharp, on the Yamal Peninsula. The nearest town has the delightful name of
Labytnangi.

I don’t say,“Ho ho ho,” but I do say,“Oh oh oh,”when I look out the window,
where I can see night, then evening, and then night again.
The twenty days of my trip were pretty exhausting, but I’m in a good mood, as
befits a Santa Claus.

They brought me here on Saturday night. I was transported with such
precautions and by such a strange route (Vladimir—Moscow—Chelyabinsk—
Yekaterinburg—Kirov—Vorkuta—Kharp) that I didn’t expect anyone to find
me here before mid-January.

So I was very surprised when the cell door was opened yesterday with the
words “A lawyer is here to see you.”The lawyer told me that you had lost track
of me, and some of you were quite worried. Thanks very much for your support!

I can’t regale you with stories about polar exotica yet, because I can only see the
fence, which is very close.

I also went for a walk. The “exercise” yard is a neighboring cell, a bit bigger,
with snow on the ground. And I saw guards, not like in central Russia, but like
in the movies, with machine guns, warm mittens, and felt boots. And with the
same beautiful fluffy German shepherds.

Anyway, don’t worry about me. I’m fine. I’m totally relieved that I’ve finally
made it here.

Thanks again to everyone for your support. And happy holidays!

Since I’m Santa Claus, you’re probably wondering about the presents. But I am
a special-regime Santa Claus, so only those who have behaved really badly get
presents.

December 31st
This is the third New Year’s Eve. I have taken the traditional family New
Year’s Eve photo using Photoshop. I am trying to keep up with the times,
and on this occasion I asked to be drawn by artificial intelligence. I hope it
turned out fantastic; I won’t see the picture myself until the letter reaches
Yamal.

“I miss you terribly” is kind of incorrect from the point of view of Russian
syntax. It’s better to say,“I miss you a lot,” or “I miss you so much.”

But, from my point of view, it is more accurate and correct. I miss my family
terribly. Yulia, my children, my parents, my brother. I miss my friends, my
colleagues, our offices, and my work. I miss you all terribly.

I have no feelings of loneliness, abandonment, or isolation. My mood is great
and quite Christmassy. But there is no substitute for normal human
communication in all its forms: from jokes at the New Year’s feast to
correspondence on Telegram and comments on Instagram and Twitter.
I miss being able to argue with people who send stupid, identical greetings and
pictures via their WhatsApp list on New Year’s Eve. It used to annoy me, but
now I just think it’s cute. Imagine someone sitting down and sending everyone
a couple of kittens with hats under a Christmas tree.

Happy New Year to everyone.

Don’t miss anyone. Not terribly, not much, or very much. Don’t miss your loved
ones, and don’t let your loved ones miss you. Continue to be a good, honest
person, and try to be a little better and more honest in the coming year.That’s
pretty much what I wish for myself. Don’t get sick, and take care of yourself.
Open cartoon gallery

Arctic hugs and polar greetings. Love you all.

2024
January 9th
This idea I had, that Putin would now be satisfied with the simple fact of
having me in a cell in the far north rather than just keeping me in the
shizo, was not only overoptimistic but also naïve.

I had just come out of quarantine when it was reported that “the convict
Navalny refused to present himself according to the regulations, did not
respond to the educative work, and did not draw appropriate conclusions for
himself.”I got seven days in a shizo.

A wonderful detail: in a punishment cell, the daily routine is slightly different.

In a normal cell, your “exercise” takes place in the afternoon. Even though it is a
polar night, it is still a few degrees warmer in the afternoon. In the shizo,
however,“exercise” starts at six-thirty in the morning. But I have already
promised myself that I will try to go for a walk no matter what the weather is.
My “exercise” yard is eleven steps from one wall and three to the other; not
much of a walk, but at least there’s something, so I go outside.

It hasn’t gotten colder than −32°C [−25.6°F]. Even at that temperature you can
walk for more than half an hour, but only if you are sure you can grow a new
nose, ears, and fingers.

Few things are as refreshing as a walk in Yamal at six-thirty in the morning.
And what a wonderful breeze blows into the courtyard despite the concrete
fence, it’s just wow!

Today I went for a walk, got frozen, and thought of Leonardo DiCaprio and
his character’s dead-horse trick in “The Revenant.”I don’t think it would work
here. A dead horse would freeze in about fifteen minutes.

Here you need an elephant. A hot or even a roasted elephant.If you cut open
the belly of a freshly roasted elephant and crawl inside, you can keep warm for a
while. But where am I going to get a hot, roasted elephant in Yamal, especially
at six-thirty in the morning? So I will continue to freeze.


January 17th
Exactly three years ago, I came back to Russia after treatment following my poisoning. I was arrested at the airport. And for three years, I’ve been in prison.

And for three years, I’ve been answering the same question. Prisoners ask it simply and directly. Prison officials inquire about it cautiously, with the recording devices turned off.

“Why did you come back?”

Responding to this question, I feel frustrated in two ways. First, there’s a dissatisfaction with myself for failing to find the right words to make everyone understand and put an end to this incessant questioning. Second, there’s frustration at the political landscape of recent decades in Russia. This landscape has implanted cynicism and conspiracy theories so deeply in society that people inherently distrust straightforward motives. They seem to believe, if you came back, there must have been some deal you made. It just didn’t work out. Or hasn’t yet. There’s a hidden plan involving the Kremlin towers. There must be a secret lurking beneath the surface. Because, in politics, nothing is as straightforward as it appears.

But there are no secrets or twisted meanings. Everything really is that simple. I have my country and my convictions. I don’t want to give up my country or betray it. If your convictions mean something, you must be prepared to stand up for them and make sacrifices if necessary.

And, if you’re not prepared to do that, you have no convictions. You just think you do. But those are not convictions and principles; they’re only thoughts in your head.

Of course, this doesn’t mean that everyone who’s not currently in prison lacks convictions. Everyone pays their price. For many people, the price is high even without being imprisoned.

I took part in elections and vied for leadership positions. The call for me is different. I travelled the length and breadth of the country, declaring everywhere from the stage, “I promise that I won’t let you down, I won’t deceive you, and I won’t abandon you.” By coming back to Russia, I fulfilled my promise to the voters. There need to be some people in Russia who don’t lie to them.

It turned out that, in Russia, to defend the right to have and not to hide your beliefs, you have to pay by sitting in a solitary cell. Of course, I don’t like being there. But I will not give up either my ideas or my homeland.

My convictions are not exotic, sectarian, or radical. On the contrary, everything I believe in is based on science and historical experience. Those in power should change. The best way to elect leaders is through honest and free elections. Everyone needs a fair legal system. Corruption destroys the state. There should be no censorship.

The future lies in these principles. But, for the present, sectarians and marginals are in power. They have absolutely no ideas. Their only goal is to cling to power. Total hypocrisy allows them to wrap themselves in any cover. So polygamists have become conservatives. Members of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union have become Orthodox. Owners of “golden passports” and offshore accounts are aggressive patriots. Lies, and nothing but lies.

It will crumble and collapse. The Putinist state is not sustainable. One day, we will look at it, and it won’t be there. Victory is inevitable.

But for now, we must not give up, and we must stand by our beliefs.

Alexei Navalny died on February 16, 2024. ♦
